Letters from Whitechapel Rulebook

Goal of the Game
Five important detectives are on the trail of Jack the Ripper, the most infamous serial killer of all time. They must chase the mysterious murderer through the tangled streets and alleys of the Whitechapel district. One player plays Jack the Ripper, and his goal is to take five victims before being caught. The rest of the players are police detectives who must cooperate to catch Jack the Ripper before the end of the game.

Contents of the Box
This box contains:
- This rulebook
- 1 Game board representing the Whitechapel district in 1888
- 6 Reference sheets
- 4 Jack’s Letter sheets (*Dear Boss, Saucy Jacky, From Hell, and Goulston Street*)
- 1 Die-cut punchboard containing:
  - 5 Head of the Investigation tiles (1 each of blue, yellow, brown, red, and green)
  - 5 Special Movement tokens (3 Coach and 2 Alley)
- 7 Black wooden Police Patrol tokens (2 false tokens, and 1 each of blue, yellow, brown, red, and green)
- 8 White wooden Woman tokens (5 marked with red and 3 unmarked)
- 1 Red wooden Time of the Crime token
- 5 White wooden Wretched pawns
- 5 Wooden Policeman pawns (1 each of blue, yellow, brown, red, and green)
- 2 Black wooden Jack pawns
- 1 Jack the Ripper screen
- 1 Pad of Jack the Ripper move track sheets
- 3 Transparent blue plastic False Clue markers
- 19 Transparent yellow plastic Clue markers
- 5 Transparent red plastic Crime Scene markers

New Components in the Revised Edition
Many components have been improved based on player feedback. Changes include:
Jack the Ripper screen: Larger map, added movement token chart, and improved physical design.
Wooden tokens: More durable, replacing previously used materials.
Markers: Different colors for improved visibility (yellow Clue markers, blue False Clue markers).
Letters: Detailed descriptions now printed on the sheets.
Rulebook: Integrated errata and clarifications.

Preparing the Game
1. Place the game board representing Whitechapel at the time of Jack the 
Ripper at the center of the table. It is marked with 195 numbered 
circles linked together by dotted lines.
2. During play, Jack the Ripper, the Policemen, and the Wretched are moved along the dotted
lines that represent Whitechapel streets.
Jack the Ripper moves stealthily between numbered circles.
Policemen move on their patrols between Crossings (without worrying
about whether the Crossings have colored borders or not).
The Wretched wander alone between numbered circles.
3. One player becomes Jack the Ripper (the most experienced
player is a good choice). The other players become the detectives. The
detectives always work together. They distribute the five Policeman pawns
among themselves in any way they agree on.
4. Jack takes a fresh move track sheet from the pad
and places it in his Jack the Ripper screen. He will also 
need a pencil (not included).
5. Jack places a black Jack pawn on the first Night
space of the game board's Night track.
Jack chooses numbered circle 90 as his Hideout.
6. Jack secretly chooses his Hideout. He may chose any
numbered circle on the game board except
a red numbered circle. When he has chosen
his Hideout, Jack writes its number on his
move track sheet in the prominent oval at
the top. Jack's goal will be to return to his
Hideout after each murder without being
arrested by the police detectives.
7. Jack collects the Crime Scene markers, the Clue
markers, the Woman tokens, the Coach
and Alley Special Movement tokens,
and the Time of the Crime token. If the
optional rules (see page 22) are being
used, Jack also collects the Jack's
Letter sheets and the False Clue markers.
8. The six Reference sheets are distributed to the
police detective players in the same
way the pawns were divided, and one
is given to the Jack player as well.
9. One of the police detective players shuffles
the Head of the Investigation tiles
and piles them facedown, in a random
order, on the provided space of the
game board.
10. The police detectiveplayers collect the
Wretched pawns and the Police Patrol
tokens. The game begins!

How to Play
The game is divided into four nights:
First Night: August 31, 1888
Second Night: September 8, 1888
Third Nigh: September 30, 1888 (The Double Event)
Fourth Nigh: November 9, 1888
Each night consists of two parts:
1. Hell Phase: Jack sets up, selects targets, and commits a murder.
2. Hunting Phase: Jack tries to escape while the police hunt him down.

First Part: Hell
1. Jack the Ripper: Preparing the Scene
2. Jack the Ripper: The Targets are Identified
3. Police: Patrolling the Streets
4. Jack the Ripper: The Victims are Chosen
5. Jack the Ripper: Blood on the Streets
6. Police: Suspense Grows
7. Jack the Ripper: Ready to Kill
8. Jack the Ripper: A Corpse on the Sidewalk
9. Police: Alarm Whistles
Second Part: Hunting
1. Jack the Ripper: Escape in the Night
2. Police: Hunting the Monster
3. Police: Clues and Suspicion

!!!!!!!!!!!!
START FROM HERE:
 First Part: Hell
Darkness falls on the notorious alleys of Whitechapel and fear
becomes palpable for those who wander in the night. Every shadow could
be Jack's own.
1.
Jack the Ripper: Preparing the Scene
Jack collects Special Movement tokens (Coach and Alley):
,Night
,Special Movement tokens
1
,August 31st, 1888
,3 Coach tokens and 2 Alley tokens
2
,September 8th, 1888
,2 Coach tokens and 2 Alley tokens
3
,September 30th, 1888
,2 Coach tokens and 1 Alley token
4
,November 9th, 1888
,1 Coach token and 1 Alley token
2.
Jack the Ripper: The Targets are Identified
Jack collects Woman tokens according to which night it is:
APRIL 1838
Tuesday the 3rd. Emma Smith
was viciously assaulted at the
junction of Osborn Street and
Brick Lane (84/in the early
hours of the day. She survived
the attack and managed to return
to her lodging house at '8 George
Street in Spitalfields. She was
taken to the London Hospital.
where she fell into a coma and
died the next day at 9:00 am. She
had claimed to have been attacked
by three men.
Saturday the 7th. The inquest
of Emma Smith's death was
conducted by the coroner for
East Middlesex. Wynne
Edwin Baxter and attended
by the local inspector of the
Metropolitan Police Service.
H Division Whitechapel
Edmund Reid (green Head of the
Investigation).
,Night
,Woman tokens
1
,August 31st, 1888
,8 Women, 5 of which are marked
2
,September 8th, 1888
,7 Women, 4 of which are marked
3
,September 30th, 1888
,6 Women, 3 of which are marked
4
,November 9th, 1888
,4 Women, 1 of which is marked
Jack places the Woman tokens facedown on red numbered circles of the
game board. He may arrange them any way he wishes.
The Woman tokens marked with red on their faces represent Jack the
Ripper's possible targets. The Woman tokens with only white on their faces are
fake targets, used to confuse the police detectives, according to Jack's strategy.
Remember, the red-marked faces remain hidden as Jack places them. Jack is
the only one who knows the actual targets!
Note: On the second and subsequent Nights of the game, Jack cannot place
Woman tokens on the red numbered circles occupied by red Crime Scene
markers.

pector
rund Reid
tan Police H Division
Whitechapel) Criminal
Inyegation Dept.
AUGUST 1888
Tuesday the 7th. Martha
T'abram was murdered around
2:30 am. Her body was found near
George Yard Buildings.in George
Yard. She had died as a result of
multiple stab wounds.
Friday the 3'st. Mary Ann
Nichols was murdered. Her body
was found around 3:45 am.lying
outside the entrance of a stabbe
in Buck's Row (later renamed
Durward Street) not far
fromthe London Hospital.
Investigations were attended by
the Bethnal Green Division of
the Metropolitan Police. The
possibility that this might be the
work of a serial killer caught the
attention of some Scotland Yard
detectives, including Frederick
Abberline (red Head of the
Investigation).

Jack places Woman tokens facedown on red numbered circles. He is the
only one who knows which ones are marked. His next victim is among
them!
3.
Police: Patrolling the Streets
The detectives turn over the top tile of the Head of the Investigation pile. The
player controlling the Policeman of the corresponding color is the Head of the
Investigation for the current Night.
The Head of the Investigation leads the investigation. On the first Night, he
places the seven Police Patrol tokens on the yellow-bordered Crossings in any
arrangement he wishes.
Some of the tokens have faces marked with the five colors of the Policeman
pawns. Two tokens (the completely black ones) are fake Patrols, used to
confuse Jack, according to the Head of the Investigation's strategy.
Remember, the marked faces of the Police Patrol tokens remain hidden as
they are placed. The Head of the Investigation is the only one who knows the
actual positions of the Policemen!

The Head of the Investigation places the Police Patrol tokens on the
game board. Jack must guess where the Policemen are and try not to get
caught!
-10-
Letters from Whitechapel
From the second Night on, the Head of the Investigation places the Police
Patrol tokens as he wishes among seven locations according to the following
restrictions:
Five of the tokens must be placed on the positions that were occupied
by the Policeman pawns at the end of the previous Night. The tokens
do not need to match the colors of the pawns that previously occupied the
positions, and they can also be fake patrols.
Two tokens must be placed on yellow-bordered Crossings that were not
occupied by Policeman pawns at the end of the previous night.

On the second Night, the new Head of the Investigation places the Police
Patrol tokens. He must place a token where each Policeman pawn was
left from the Night before, but he may also place tokens on two yellow-
bordered Crossings, and may mix up the placement of real and fake Patrols
to improve the detective's strategy, hoping to confuse Jack and control the
game board. The Police are getting ready to hunt Jack once again!
Optional Rule: From the second Night onward, after the Police Patrol tokens
have been placed, Jack can use one Jack's Letter each Night (see "Jack's Letters,"
page 22).
4. Jack the Ripper: The Victims are Chosen
All of the Woman tokens are turned faceup. Those marked with red are
replaced with Wretched pawns. Those not marked are simply removed from
the game board. The Time of the Crime token is placed on the yellow Roman
numeral I of the move track.
5. Jack the Ripper: Blood on the Streets
Now, Jack must decide whether to kill a target or wait a little bit longer. 
Waiting gives Jack more time to escape, but also gives the Head of the 
Investigation the opportunity to move the Wretched pawns in ways that might 
inconvenience Jack. (But if the Time of the Crime token is on the Roman numeral "V," 
Jack can no longer wait and must choose to kill.)
If Jack decides to kill, he chooses one of the Wretched pawns on the game board and 
replaces it with a Crime Scene marker. Return the Wretched pawn and one red-marked Woman 
token to the game box. If Jack decides to wait, the Night continues with phase 6, "Police: Suspense Grows."
Jack chooses his victim and converts the Wretched pawn into a Crime Scene marker. 
A corpse lies butchered on the street! Note: On the third Night, September 30th, 
there are two murders. See "The Third Night: The Double Event," page 21, for the relevant rules. 
If Jack decides to kill, the Night then continues with phase 8, "Jack the Ripper: A Corpse on the Sidewalk."
6. Police: Suspense Grows
First, the Time of the Crime token is moved on to the next yellow Roman numeral in ascending order.
Then, the Head of the Investigation must move each of the Wretched pawns on the game board.
Each one must move along dotted lines to an adjacent, unoccupied numbered circle.    
The Wretched pawn on numbered circle 65 must move. The Head of the Investigation must 
choose a destination from among numbered circles 63, 66, 51, 67, 84, 83, and 82. 
He chooses 82 and moves the Wretched pawn there. A Wretched pawn must obey the following 
movement restrictions. It cannot: end its movement adjacent to a Police Patrol token; 
cross a Police Patrol token during the Wretched's movement; or end its movement 
in a circle containing a Crime Scene marker. 
If a Wretched has no legal moves, it remains in its current circle. 
7. Jack the Ripper: Ready to Kill
Jack chooses a Police Patrol token and reveals it.  If it is a fake Patrol (with a black face), 
it is removed from the game board.  Otherwise, it remains on the game board, faceup.
Then, the game continues with another iteration of Hell phase 5, "Jack the Ripper: Blood on the Streets."    
8. Jack the Ripper: A Corpse on the Sidewalk
Using his pencil, Jack records on his sheet, in the space corresponding to the Roman numeral currently 
marked by the Time of the Crime token, and on the row corresponding to the current Night, the number 
from the numbered circle that's marked by the Crime Scene token he just placed on the game board. 
Jack is now located at that numbered circle.  For the rest of the Night he will be moving between 
circles, trying to get back to his Hideout without being caught.  To prepare for the Hunting, 
Jack places the second Jack pawn on the game board's move track, on the space marked by the
Time of the Crime token.  That Jack pawn is used to keep track of Jack's moves while he tries to escape.    
9. Police: Alarm Whistles
The detectives reveal all the Police Patrol tokens that have not yet been revealed.
They replace the color-marked tokens with the corresponding Policeman pawns and remove
he fake tokens from the game board. They also remove from the game board any Wretched pawns still in play.    

Second Part: Hunting
Jack the Ripper: Escape in the Night
Jack moves from his current numbered circle to an adjacent numbered circle, following the dotted lines.
He may not move over a Crossing occupied by a Policeman pawn.  Jack plots his move secretly, noting his 
destination circle on his sheet in the next available space to the right of his current location, in the 
row representing the current Night.  Once his destination has been secretly noted, Jack moves his Jack 
pawn one space rightward on the game board's move track.  His pawn's location should always correspond 
on the track to the Roman or Arabic numeral of the move he just made.    
Note: Jack cannot choose a destination that would force him to move over a Crossing occupied by a Policeman pawn. 
If, for this reason, Jack cannot make a legal move, he loses the game!    
If he wishes, Jack can replace his normal movement with a Special Movement.
To do so, he must expend a Coach or Alley token.  See "Special Movements," page 19, 
for more information.  If Jack moves onto his Hideout, he may declare that 
his escape was successful, and the current Night's Hunting ends.  See "The End of the Hunting," 
page 18, for more information.  If Jack runs out of moves (that is, if he fills in the "15" square 
on his sheet) without reaching his Hideout and declaring his escape, he loses the game.  
See "The End of the Game," page 22, for more information.

Police: Hunting the Monster
After consulting together, the detectives move their Policeman pawns.  Each player moves the pawn(s) whose Policemen he controls, starting with the Head of the Investigation and proceeding clockwise around the table.  If a player controls multiple pawns, he chooses the order in which he moves them.  The Policeman pawns are moved along the dotted lines.  When moving, a policeman can move up to a distance of two (0, 1, or 2) Crossings.  Policeman pawns ignore numbered circles when moving.    

JULY 1889

Wednesday the 17th. Alice McKenzie was murdered in Castle Alley.  Her wounds were not as deep as those of previous victims, however.    

The yellow Policeman pawn moves two Crossings.  If Jack traveled down that street, he surely left a clue!  When moving, a Policeman pawn can move over other Policeman pawns, but cannot end its move in the same Crossing as another Policeman pawn.    

Police: Clues and Suspicion
Optional Rule: If the False Clue optional rule is being used, Jack can collect and use False Clue markers in this phase.  See "False Clues," page 23.    

Starting with the Head of the Investigation and proceeding clockwise around the table, each detective states, for each Policeman pawn he controls, that the Policeman is either looking for clues or executing an arrest.  Both types of actions can be undertaken in the numbered circles adjacent to that Policeman pawn (i.e., in the numbered circles directly connected by dotted lines to the Crossing where the Policeman pawn is located).  There cannot be an intervening Crossing on the dotted line connecting the Crossing the Policeman pawn is on and the circle he wants to search for clues or make an arrest in.    

-16-

--- PAGE 6 ---

Letters from Whitechapel

Numbered circles 99, 100, and 120 are adjacent to the yellow Policeman pawn.  Circle 83 is not adjacent, because the route to 83 is interrupted by a Crossing.  Each Policeman pawn can execute only one action.  That is, it can either look for clues or execute an arrest, but not both.  (However, if a player controls several Policeman pawns, he can choose a different action for each one.)    

Looking for Clues

To look for clues, the detective announces the number of an adjacent numbered circle he wishes to inspect.  Jack checks to see if that number appears anywhere on his sheet in the current Night's row.  If it does, he places a Clue marker on that numbered circle, and that Policeman's action ends.  If it does not appear, the detective announces the number of another adjacent numbered circle.  This process repeats until either a Clue marker is placed or no more adjacent numbered circles remain to be inspected.    

AUGUST 1889

Tuesday the 10th. An unidentified woman's body was found under a railway arch in Pinchin Street, just as with the Whitehall Mystery.    

JUNE 1890

Saturday the 1st. James Monro was replaced as Commissioner by Sir Edward Bradford.    

The yellow Policeman decides to look for clues.  He announces "99!"  That number does not appear in the current Night's row, so Jack replies negatively.  The yellow Policeman calls "100!"  That number does appear in the current Night's row, so Jack places a Clue token on the corresponding numbered circle.  Jack's been there tonight... but how long ago?  Even through numbered circle 120 is also adjacent to the yellow Policeman's location, the yellow Policeman cannot investigate it now because finding a clue ends his action.    

-17-

--- PAGE 7 ---

Letters from Whitechapel

Optional Rules: If the False Clue rule is being used, Jack receives a False Clue marker every time he reveals five Clue markers in the same Night.  See "False Clues," page 23, for more information.    

Executing an Arrest

To execute an arrest, the detective announces the number of one (and only one!) numbered circle that is adjacent to his Policeman pawn.  If the announced number is Jack's current location (that is, the most recent number Jack recorded on his sheet), Jack is arrested and loses the game.  If the announced number is not Jack's current location, no further information is given and that Policeman's action ends.    

FEBRUARY 1891

Friday the 13th. Frances Coles was murdered under a railway arch in Royal Mint Street.  A man named James Sadler, who had been seen with Coles earlier, was arrested by the police and charged with her murder.  A high-profile investigation by Donald Swanson (brown Head of the Investigation) and Henry Moore into Sadler's history and his whereabouts at the time of the previous Whitechapel murders suggests that the police suspected him of being Jack the Ripper.    

The yellow Policeman decides to execute an arrest.  He chooses circle 99, which is adjacent.  Jack checks his current location and replies negatively.  If Jack isn't there, where is he?    

If Jack has neither been caught nor reached his Hideout after all Policemen have taken actions, play proceeds with another iteration of Hunting phase 1, "Jack the Ripper: Escape in the Night."    

The End of the Hunting

If Jack is on the numbered circle he chose as his Hideout, he may declare his escape, and the Hunting - and with it, the Night - ends.    

Remove all Clue markers from the game board.  Leave the Policeman pawns and Crime Scene markers in place.  Remove the Special Movement tokens and the Jack pawn from the move track.  If the False Clue optional rules are being used, discard any unused False Clue markers.  The next Night then begins with Hell phase 1, "Jack the Ripper: Preparing the Scene."  Jack moves his Jack pawn to the next Night on the Night track.  Remember: If Jack fails to reach his Hideout and declare his escape by the end of the last possible move on his move track sheet (square "15"), he loses the game.    




Special Movements
Coach: Move two numbered circles in one turn, even through Policemen.
Alley: Move across a block of houses.

The Third Night: The Double Event
On September 30th, Jack must kill **two** victims instead of one. The second crime scene serves as Jack's first move of the night.

End of the Game
Jack Wins if he kills five victims and escapes successfully for four nights.
Police Win if they arrest Jack or prevent him from reaching his hideout.

Optional Rules
To Help Jack the Ripper:
Jack’s Letters: Special effects that manipulate the police patrols.
False Clues: Jack can create misleading clues to throw off the detectives.

To Help the Police:
Rushing: Policemen can move extra spaces.
Area Arrests: Arrest attempts can target multiple locations.
Catch Me, If You Can: Jack's hideout cannot be next to a crime scene.
I Know Your Address: A special rule allowing police to attempt an instant arrest.

Summary of Gameplay

Each night consists of:
1. Hell Phase (Setup, Murder, Police Setup)
2. Hunting Phase (Jack Escapes, Police Investigate, Arrest Attempt)
If Jack escapes for four nights, he wins. If the police catch him, they win!
